explain a thread the way Gmail does, however she asks for it

Apsara: "If i say explain 5 - will it provide detailed summary include
the in thread mails" -- and then, on the shape: "Give summary need to
give data like gmail summary inbuilt feature".

THE ANSWER WAS NO, ON BOTH COUNTS.

summarize_email resolved the index and then called getMessage on ONE
id. It never opened the thread. On her 26-message appointment thread it
explained the newest email and nothing else, and the only history she
got was whatever quoted chain the sender's own mail client happened to
paste underneath -- luck, not a feature.

"explain 5" was not a command either. It fell to the AI layer for Gemini
to interpret, unlike "reply to 5" and "ignore 5".

THE TARGET IS HER OWN REFERENCE. A real Gmail AI Overview she pasted:

  * Apsara requested delivery appointment for PO #4302902 ...
  * Matthew requested rescheduling to Sept 1, and Tiffany confirmed
    moving delivery to Sept 1 at 12 PM.

And a second, already quoted in replyWatch.js since August:

  "...loading Aug 12. Booking rolled multiple times; Accounting requested
   new ERD of 8/19 or 8/20, then confirmed HMM RAON 0025W (CUT 8/18). You
   requested rolling to HMM TURQUOISE 0011W (ERD 8/25, CUT 8/28); Andy is
   working to get EDO # ASAP."

Read together the shape is precise: chronological, every actor named
with her as "You", every reference kept verbatim, repetition compressed,
and it ENDS ON THE LIVE STATE -- the sentence saying what is true now is
last, because that is the one she acts on.

WHAT THE MODEL MAY AND MAY NOT DO. Everything countable is computed in
code and handed to the renderer: participants and their message counts,
when the thread started, how long it has run, who spoke last, whether
SHE has ever written on it, what is attached. The model writes the
narrative only.

That split is this month's whole lesson. Verbalised confidence came back
1.0 on sixteen consecutive emails; 47% of summaries named the wrong
speaker; asked_for was invented for deliveries. Every one was fixed by
moving a checkable fact out of the model's answer and into arithmetic. A
story genuinely needs a model, so it gets exactly that job.

── AND THEN SHE PUSHED BACK ON THE ROUTING, CORRECTLY ─────────────────

  "Why should i restrict it to explain N. WHat if user say, give summary
   of N or what N is about? etc.. Pass it throygh AI and let AI decide"

She is right and I had over-applied a rule. "reply to 5" and "ignore 5"
are regex because a misroute there has SIDE EFFECTS -- a draft to the
wrong customer, a real email dismissed. Explaining is READ-ONLY; the
worst case is showing the wrong thread, which costs nothing.

But "move it to the AI" is not the answer either, because that leaves
TWO overlapping actions doing nearly the same job, and a model asked to
choose between near-identical options gets it wrong some of the time.
That is a classifier problem I would be creating, not solving.

So: ONE implementation, three ways in.

  regex "explain 5"        instant, no API call, cannot misfire
  AI "give summary of 5"   -> summarize_email, which now DELEGATES here
  AI "what did Raj send"   -> summarize_email by name, which also does

Her complaint was never the routing name. It was that the output read
one message and ignored the thread. Fixing the OUTPUT once, on the path
everything already goes through, beats adding another intent.

tellThreadStory returns false for a thread of one, where the existing
single-message summary is the better answer, and false on any read
error -- a summary of one message beats an apology.

FIVE THINGS THE TESTS CAUGHT THAT READING DID NOT:

  1. storyPrompt defaulted its fence markers to '', so the fence existed
     only because the one caller happened to pass one. Any future caller
     that forgot would hand a whole thread to the model with no boundary.
     Fenced by default now, with the markers exported. (EB8)
  2. My first reverse-verify of the delegation broke NO test, because
     EF3 only reads source text -- exactly the pseudo-test pattern that
     has gone green six times this month while the thing it covered was
     disabled. Replaced with a real invocation: stubbed thread, stubbed
     model, and the message that would reach her phone. (EF0a-EF0l)
  3. Disabling only the early `return` ALSO broke no test: tellThreadStory
     still sent, so the story went out AND the single-message summary
     followed it -- two WhatsApp messages for one question, with every
     content assertion still green. Counting the sends is what makes the
     test sensitive. (EF0l)
  4. My stub made getGmailRead async. The real one is synchronous and
     summarizeEmail does `gmail = getGmailRead()` without awaiting, so
     `gmail` became a Promise, threads.get blew up inside a try/catch and
     the delegation silently declined -- indistinguishable from the
     feature not working until I ran it under a debugger. My stub was
     wrong, not the code.
  5. Whether she reads as "You" depends on the sender-read token being
     present; that is the only thing that tells Jarvis which address is
     HERS rather than the mailbox being read. Without it she is NAMED,
     which is accurate rather than wrong. Both cases pinned, because the
     difference is invisible until someone deploys without that token.

TESTS: tests/explain-thread.js, new, 57 assertions. All 124 suites run:
0 failures.

Co-Authored-By: Claude Opus 5 <noreply@anthropic.com>
Claude-Session: https://claude.ai/code/session_01PaVFkg7JrYeRfUPzvLCFtt

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AND THE LOOP AROUND IT. Apsara: "Do loop engineering on this."

The digest has read its own message before sending since 18 Sep. The
story did not -- and this is the surface where the model has MORE
freedom, not less: free prose, rather than structured fields rendered
into a template.

EVERY CHECK IS A PROMISE THE PROMPT ALREADY MAKES:

  prompt says                        check
  ---------------------------------- --------------------------
  "WRITE DATES AS DATES"             relative-date-in-bullet
  "NAME THE ACTOR IN EVERY BULLET"   actorless-bullet
  "never write a figure that is not  ungrounded-figure
   in the text above"                ungrounded-reference
  (nothing, but it has happened)     leaked-value

That mapping is the design. A rule the prompt states and nothing
enforces is a rule the model keeps only when it feels like it, and this
project has measured how often that is: confidence 1.0 on sixteen
consecutive emails, the wrong speaker named on 47% of a real sample.

Figures and references are grounded against the LEDGER THE MODEL WAS
GIVEN, on digits only, the same normalisation groundFigures uses on
key_figures -- so "$13,992.00", "USD 13,992.00" and "13992.00" are one
figure rather than three misses, and "$99,999.00" out of nowhere is
caught.

THE REPAIR IS THE BULLET, NEVER THE MESSAGE. The counted half --
participants, span, who spoke last, whether she has ever replied -- is
computed in code and goes out whatever the model does. Losing a whole
thread summary to one bad sentence would be the silence this month has
been about.

THE LEARN HALF: every failure is written to the same audit row the
digest verifier uses, with `surface` telling them apart, so
scripts/ruler.js --verify is ONE scoreboard across both:

                                   09-18 09-19   total
  story/actorless-bullet               .     2       2
  digest/relative-date-in-summary      1     .       1
  story/ungrounded-figure              .     1       1

TWO BUGS MY OWN TESTS FOUND, and both were real:

  1. EG15: the prompt tells the model to write "You" for Apsara, but
     whether "You" appears in facts.participants depends on the
     sender-read token existing -- that token is the only thing that
     says which address is HERS rather than the mailbox being read.
     Without it the list says "Apsara", so the verifier dropped every
     bullet that did exactly what the prompt asked and she got a thread
     summary with no story in it. Both spellings are accepted now.
  2. EG13: with an EMPTY participant list the only verifiable name is
     "You", so every bullet naming a real person the header parse failed
     to enumerate would be dropped -- a good sentence lost because
     something upstream broke. The actor check now stands down entirely
     rather than treating ignorance as evidence.

Every mechanism reverse-verified: disabling the call, the actor check,
figure grounding, reference grounding, the relative-date rule or the
audit write each fails the assertions that cover it.

tests/explain-thread.js is 81 assertions. All 126 suites run: 0 failures.
