Jarvis reads its own message before sending it

Apsara asked for "loop engineering". This is the loop that pays for
itself here: a verification pass between deciding and sending.

EVERY CHECK IS A MESSAGE SHE ACTUALLY RECEIVED AND HAD TO CORRECT:

  "tomorrow tomorrow -- confirmation of calculations"
  "TOMORROW (after tomorrow morning) -- release timing for shipment"
  "Ignore 1" -> "I don't have a #undefined from a recent digest"
  "Rajkumar sends a draft BoL for your review / Review and approve
   (you are only copied in)"                    <- contradicts itself
  "!! ... -- by 9/17 (today)" off an estimated ready date
  a deadline of "September 17" parsed as the year 2001 -> OVERDUE 9131d

Not one needed a model to spot. Each is a property of the RENDERED TEXT
that arithmetic can check: a word repeated, a literal "undefined", a
number no real deadline can hold, two clauses that cannot both be true.

THE DESIGN DECISION THAT MATTERS is what happens when a check trips.

NOT "don't send". Silence is the failure this whole month has been
about -- 24 purchase orders and 22 consequential emails vanished quietly
and she found out by noticing an absence. A verifier that answers a bad
line with no message would be the same mistake with a safety badge on.

So: drop the offending item, RE-RENDER, and send the rest. Re-rendering
rather than editing the string is deliberate -- "reply to N" resolves
against the ITEM ARRAY, so a line cut out of the text would leave the
numbers pointing at different mail. That is the bug class this file
exists to catch and it would be embarrassing to introduce it here.

AND IT CANNOT HOLD SOMETHING FOREVER. Past MAX_HELD_BACK (2) the item
goes out anyway with a line saying it did not pass Jarvis's own checks.
Two, because the checks are mostly about STALE TEXT and the cleaners run
at render, so a second attempt often passes; a third failure means it
never will, and silence is the worse answer.

The counter lives ON THE QUEUED ITEM, not in a new store field: a
`store.heldBack` map would be the SEVENTH field for saveStore's
allowlist to swallow (lastScanAt, sentIndex, failures, muted, brain's
`indices` and pos were each eaten by one), and a counter reset on every
write can never reach its cap -- so an item would be held back forever,
which is precisely the silence the cap exists to prevent.

FIVE BUGS OF MY OWN, all found by tests rather than by reading:

  1. The repair loop's bound was `guard <= list.length`, re-reading a
     length that SHRINKS on every drop. With three bad items it exited
     after two and shipped the third. A verifier with an off-by-one in
     its own loop is worse than no verifier. (DI1)
  2. The wiring cleared `undelivered` wholesale on a successful send, so
     the held-back item was thrown away -- turning the verifier into
     exactly the silent dropper it was built to prevent. (BJ3)
  3. `lastDigest` still contained held-back items, so "reply to 1" could
     resolve to an email she was never shown. (BJ4)
  4. My first fixture used "tomorrow", and the check never fired --
     because resolveRelativeDates had already cleaned it on the way in.
     Good news for production, useless as a test. "next week" and "this
     morning" have no single day to resolve to, so the cleaner leaves
     them and they stay stale forever: that is the real gap the verifier
     covers, and the fixture uses one now. (BH)
  5. The two-item fixture gave both mails the same sender and the same
     ask, so groupMatters merged them into one matter and the scenario
     silently stopped testing what it claimed. (BJ)

AND ONE GUARD THAT DOES LESS THAN I CLAIMED. Deleting replyWatch's
empty-body check breaks no test, because the manager outbox already
refuses an empty body and reports `not delivered`, which retains the
queue. Two layers guard the blank message and the outbox is the one that
holds. The guard upstream is kept only for the log line and the return
value -- without it the run reports "digest send failed ... not
delivered", which reads like WhatsApp is broken when the verifier did
its job perfectly, and a monitor watching for that string would page
somebody. Both the comment and the test now say so, rather than letting
the next reader believe the wrong layer is protecting them.

ALSO IN THIS COMMIT: tests/emailwatch-signals.js sections AJ (10) and
AK (4) are RESTORED. Another session committed a pre-AJ copy of that
file over them. The fixes themselves survived in replyWatch.js and only
the assertions were lost -- a guard nobody is watching, which is the
worst of the two things to lose.

TESTS: tests/digest-verify.js (31, each check tested twice -- once on
the real historical bug and once on the legitimate lookalike, because a
verifier that rejects the lookalike would quietly eat real mail) and BH,
BI, BJ in tests/two-mailbox.js (real run(), 33 total). Every mechanism
reverse-verified.

All 120 suites run: 0 failures.

Co-Authored-By: Claude Opus 5 <noreply@anthropic.com>
Claude-Session: https://claude.ai/code/session_01PaVFkg7JrYeRfUPzvLCFtt

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SECOND HALF, same request: "Use loop engineering to adjust the prompt as
per the feedback."

THE PROMPT, CHANGED FROM THE VERIFIER'S OWN EVIDENCE -- not from memory.

1. RELATIVE WORDS. The rule already existed, but it named only
   "tomorrow" and sat buried inside a paragraph about amounts. The
   verifier proves the model still writes "next week" and "this
   morning", and those are the ones that MATTER: resolveRelativeDates
   converts yesterday/today/tonight/tomorrow against the arrival date,
   so those are already clean by the time a digest renders. "next week"
   has no single day to resolve to, so the cleaner leaves it and it
   stays stale forever. That is the one failure class where ONLY the
   prompt can help -- code can hold the line back, it cannot fix it.

   Promoted to its own rule, every banned word named, three worked
   rewrites, an instruction for what to do when the date cannot be
   worked out, and the consequence stated: Jarvis holds the whole item
   back, so a relative word costs her the line and not just the date.

2. action_needed WHEN IT IS NOT HERS. The prompt said "return null"; the
   live failure proves that was too soft -- "Rajkumar sends a draft BoL
   for your review / Review and approve / (you are only copied in)", and
   her reply: "If its not pointing to any of edgemetals worker, why is
   it showing?" Now absolute, and grounded in her own words.

AND THE MEASUREMENT, WHICH IS THE PART THAT MAKES IT A LOOP. Editing a
prompt and declaring it better is exactly what this project keeps
punishing: six suites passed this month while the thing they covered was
disabled, and `confidence` sat at 1.0 for sixteen straight emails while
everyone assumed it meant something.

So every verifier failure is written to the audit log with the check
that caught it, and `node scripts/ruler.js --verify --days 14` tallies
them per check per DAY:

                            09-17 09-18   total
  relative-date-in-summary      2     1       3
  contradicts-itself            1     .       1

A count that falls is a prompt change that worked. A count that does not
is the outcome worth knowing and the one nobody ever measures. The six
most recent failures print with the sentence that caused them, because a
tally with no examples tells you a number and not what to change.

The report also refuses to read its own silence as success: "a check
that never fires is either fixed or never reachable, and those two look
identical from here".

BL1-BL5 assert the prompt CLAUSES exist and say so plainly in the test:
that is weaker than a behavioural test and proves the instruction is
present, not that Gemini obeys it. The honest measure of obedience is
the per-day count, and it takes a week of real mail. The assertions
exist so the clauses cannot be quietly deleted in the meantime.

ONE BUG IN MY OWN REPORTER: ruler.js exits early when the log carries no
`reply_watch` decision rows -- the normal state right after a deploy --
and that swallowed the entire verifier scoreboard on its first run. The
exit now stands aside for --verify.
